Hi, my name is John Jakewish. I am a
doctor of biomedical engineering. I am
going to talk today about building
muscle with bad genetics. I have
horrible genetics. I'm going to explain
to you why I know that and how you can
figure out what your genetics are like
with the help of a few
[Music]
examples. I'm going to go through the
story of my fitness journey. I'm going
to talk about all the things that worked
and all the things that massively wasted
my time so that you don't have to waste
any time and you can learn from my
adventure. I want to really emphasize
that what I'm going to be talking about
probably applies to you because
somewhere between 90 and 99% of the
population, I estimate uh the 90 is
based off of a study that lifehack.com
did showing that 90% of people quit
within 90 days of starting their fitness
program. Uh and they're not quitting
because they got great results. They're
quitting because they got no results.
So, I want to talk about how I'm one of
the guys who would always get absolutely
zero results with standard weightlifting
and what I did to address it and also
the opposing viewpoints when looking at
genetic outliers. And I'm I'm going to
explain why you really shouldn't be
looking at the professional bodybuilder
for motivation because you probably have
absolutely nothing in common with that
individual. Let me get started. When I
was in high school, like every other
high school guy, I was looking at
pictures of Arnold and Dorian Yates was
popular at the time. Everybody wanted to
be like Dorian. Everyone wanted to do
the Dorian Yates workout. As soon as I
got my learner's permit, when you're 15
and a half, you're allowed to drive
during daylight hours by yourself or
with uh with an adult in the car. I
basically got my driver's license so I
could go to the gym. All I wanted to do
was have a gym membership and I I wanted
to be jacked. That's that is where my
head was. That's what I cared about. Uh
my friends, they're all the same. We
were all going to meet up at the gym
every day. And started going and I I
very quickly realized that nothing was
happening despite the fact that I was
getting a whole lot of protein. I was
doing all the movements that all my
favorite athletes were doing according
to Flex Magazine, which at the time was
an abomination of literature and I don't
even know if it exists anymore. I think
it's just online now, but they've sort
of been forced to be more real because
the internet has been more real. And by
real, I mean the athletes are talking
about their genetic differences, which
is a good thing. and they are talking
about the performance dancing drug use
that is very prevalent in bodybuilding.
That's not a shock to anybody. So when I
was getting started, it was just very
apparent. I saw a couple of guys who
adapted very quickly, built a ton of
muscle, but this was rare because the
rest of my friends were like me. They
would be in there all the time and
absolutely nothing would change. And
that was just generally frustrating for
me. And I realized looking at some of
the other guys, there was a guy I went
to high school with, his name was Mark.
He put on 30 lbs over a summer, like I
think it was sophomore year, he started
varsity for the the football team. It
was just kind of amazing. This guy
looked like he was 25 years old. Uh, and
even though, you know, he was just a
just a sophomore in high school. And it
was because he put on so much muscle.
And I'd ask him like, "What are you
doing differently than me?" He says, "I
don't know. like I smoke cigarettes like
and you know I'm thinking well that
that's not that didn't make the
difference you know so it's like we
couldn't figure out what it was we were
eating the same thing we were lifting
the same way and he was growing like
crazy and absolutely nothing happened to
me so uh fast forward a few years I I
went to university went out for the
rugby team now I had put on a little bit
of muscle probably just because of
puberty
Uh, and I was about 160. It was a lean
160. And I became an outside center for
the Sacramento State rugby team. That's
where I went to undergrad. It is the
number one university on Highway 50.
Very prestigious. So, I uh enjoyed the
hell out of playing rugby and I I really
wanted to pick a sport where I could
work with great strength and
conditioning coaches and I could figure
out why I wasn't gifted in the putting
on muscle department and how I could
address it. I got zero answers. It was
unbelievable. All the strength
conditioning coaches that I talked to
were just sort of like, yeah, you're
normal. most people just, you know,
you're strong like and I was stronger
than a lot of the people that were my
contemporaries that want wanted my
position and were trying on for the
team. But it was like, yeah, okay, but I
want an additional maybe 20 lbs of
muscle or something like that. Still
wasn't happening. And these strength and
conditioning coaches were giving me zero
answers. And so I thought, okay, well,
I'm going to enjoy playing rugby and try
and understand what I'm missing out on.
Coincidentally, at the same time, I ran
into quite a few people who, you know, I
run into them in the in the powerlifting
gym at Sacramento State, and they were a
lot of these guys were working as
personal trainers. And I noticed that
when they got clients, the number one
thing they would do is get their clients
lean. Like they really they would tell
them about all the muscle they would
gain, but they would put them on a
nutrition program that, you know,
standard kind of calorie deficit, the
high protein sort of thing. And and I
realized, okay, these guys actually
aren't putting a lot of muscle on their
clients. They're just getting them to be
leaner so they look good. As I started
asking questions, they would say things
to me like, "Yeah, not everybody gains a
lot of muscle, but everybody can be
lean." So, I thought, "Okay, that makes
sense from a business model standpoint
of a personal trainer." But that's
really kind of a bummer for those of us
who are trying to figure out why we
can't build muscle. So, I I kind of gave
up on the idea or just continued doing
regular lifting with kind of zero
results uh and just focused on being as
lean and as fast as I could be. I was
fortunately I was pretty fast cuz to be
an outside center, it's kind of like a
wide receiver type position in rugby. I
was good at that. And years went on. I
ended up graduating and I worked in
software. uh worked for uh Bay Area, San
Francisco Bay Area software company.
Then I ended up starting a medical
device company because my mother was
diagnosed with osteoporosis. And this
was a very key time for my thinking when
it came to the physicality of engaging
muscle, stimulating muscle to grow. And
what are the differences between
different human beings? Why do we have
different genetic potentials? I think
most people thought that the differences
have to do with how much of a anabolic
hormone level does somebody have versus
another. Like that that must be the big
genetic difference because we see what
happens with people who use
performance-enhancing drugs and how it
seems like overnight they can they can
become sensational, which by the way is
not true either. But I didn't know that
and most people were very confused on
that subject. So I marched forward
looking at bone density to treat my
mother's osteoporosis. And what I
determined in developing the osteo
strong system, what ultimately became
the osteo strong system, which now has
300 locations in 15 different countries
to treat
osteoporosis, is we isolate the
strongest range of motion. So just as an
example, in the upper extremities. So,
I'm going to have the back of the hand
in line with the clavicle, 120° angle
from upper to lower arm. So, I can
either produce or absorb the greatest
amount of force in this position. So, by
isolating this position and allowing
people to just exercise right here. So,
very short range of motion in order to
compress this kinetic chain. So, I'm
compressing the clavicle. I'm
compressing the humorus, the radius and
so all these bones are compressed on
their axis. So axial loading very
important for bone mass in I saw
athletic people with their upper
extremities creating 2,000 lbs of force.
Now they can't bench press 2,000 lb.
That would be ludicrous. But in that
very isolated position right here,
incredible forces. And we saw that
echoed all throughout the body. And I
realized that we have incredible
capacity to create force or absorb force
in very specific positions. And I
thought, wow, like that's really a
different type of
exhaustion. Maybe if I focused on that
instead of doing regular weight
training, I could stimulate something
some kind of growth. So, I thought,
okay, let me do a literature review and
see if anybody has looked at different
loading, like high loading where you're
stronger and maybe low loading where
you're less strong. Sort of like
accommodating the movement so that you
can engage more musculature and you can
go to a deeper level of fatigue. I I
just thought like, you know, m maybe
something like that exists. Turns out it
absolutely existed. If this video helped
you, I want you to subscribe and follow.
I'm going to put out videos on a regular
basis. I think they're going to help a
whole lot of people, especially if
you're one of those people that doesn't
just instantly grow from lifting regular
weights. We've got the answer for